Unknown China. Beyond big cities.


China was somewhere on the bottom of my wish list for a long time because I associated it only with big modern cities. I was so very wrong! China is huge and there is a lot to see for all kind of tourists.

In 2017 we have travelled in central and Western part of China. The part which is very little known for foreigners and Chinese themselves. When we talked to local people in Chongqing, Xi-an - the first huge cities which we have visited during this trip, it seemed that nobody knew anything about Western part of their country and have not ever been there.

So what is there to see? I will list my best experiences from the trip which route you can see in a picture below.


1.Desert in Dunhuang

Adriano took me to this place with almost eyes shut. I knew very little about Dunhuang and have not browsed the images before arriving. I can almost imagine how silk road traders felt to find this place thousands of years ago. You walk in the endless desert, the wind is blowing the sand, the heat is burning your skin and out of sudden like a mirage a tiny beautiful village appears in front of you. It looks so surreal.

Actually the whole experience, including desert itself was surreal for me. When I think of China, it is definitely not a desert, camels, or ancient silk road villages pop up in my mind. But it is there and this place is unbelievable. Even though touristic (zero foreigners, but a lot of Chinese), it is in my top list of best experiences during travels.

This is a sand skiing resort too, but if you do not buy/rent the tools, just to roll down or run down the dunes is so much fun.  You value the ride even more as there is no much help to climb the hill first. We were lucky to come on a cloudy day and in late afternoon, with direct sun in August it would have been exhaustingly hot.

Another fun thing to do is riding or simply making friends with camels.


2.Colourful mountains in Zhangye

On internet you can find loads of beautiful but exaggerated colourful photos from this place. I will not photoshop, this is how it really looks, and it is amazing.

The territory is widely spread. There are touristic buses transferring people from one spot to another, and It takes a full day to explore Zhangye. Everything is nicely organized but very basic Chinese or at least some translating application is a must. We have met only a few Western tourists during our whole trip in China.


3.Tianshan mysterious Grand Canyon and some other mountains around Kuche Xinjiang.

From the photos seen it looks similar to the USA Grand Canyon. Strangely when we were there, there was only one other couple seen around. Completely deserted area even though there was an old bridge (with some pieces missing) to walk for visitors.

Some remains of 3rd century Budhist temple on the silk road in mountain area.


4. Remains of antient Yar city, 2nd century BC (close to Turpan) 


5.Turpan


It was the first city which we visited in the Western half of China. I did not know what to expect and it was a bit of chocking to find out how different everything was compared to our previously visited big modern cities (Xi-an, Chongqing). This is when I understood why Chinese did not even consider the Western half of the country as China. It did not look to be the same country. People looked differently, architecture was different, size and quantities of people around became “normal” (not overcrowded), even language was different, and in some town equally people used Chinese characters along with Arab alphabet. I did not have any problem to connect to VPN and Facebook or google in China before, but starting from Turpan nothing was working any more.

Turpan had two centres – new one of Chinese style with tall buildings and modern shiny parks, and old traditional one with people cooking on the street and kids running labyrinth of narrow streets. It was very difficult to find the second one, though it was much more lively part of the town.

Local people look more similar to their neighbour country citizens than to Chinese. Even though we could not chat much, people were very friendly to us.

In the photo below there is an example of typical local street and architecture. The houses are small, hidden behind tall fences and decorated big doors with  trees seen growing from the inside.

Have you ate anything with rasins recently? They might be from Turpan. Every house, every traditionaly looking local street dried yellow small grapes. I found it surprising that they hide grapes in shade to dry them, somehow direct sun is destroying them.

Discovering hostels

In Turpan I have discovered an atmosphere of hostels. To be honest, it has nothing to do with Turpan, just that it happened to me there.

For those who always look for comfort, the finest service and stay in four – five star hotels, I am a wild type, but in the world of backpackers I am an exotic princess, demanding for separate room, private bathroom and hot showers. Hostels with ten beds in a room has never been my cup of tea. In Turpan I have seen the other side of hostel meaning. Beside that they sometimes have separate small rooms, I have discovered the community and lifestyle of hostels.

While we were travelling in central China, we have always stayed in hotels and have not met any foreigners. Those hotels were full with Chinese. It comes without saying that on the road we did not meet any foreigners either. We did speak with a few Chinese but our social life was very limited during this trip mainly because of language barrier with locals and no tourists around.

So here we come to Turpan, a big wooden door says this is our hostel (there were no hotels available for her “majesty” Inga), we open the doors of this hidden place… and here it is – a happy local retriever, beautiful private yard, some French, some Australians, some… I don’t remember from where and who, but people speaking English!, people meeting for the first time and sharing their travel stories, helping to arrange each other the next moves, cooperating together to share a car, or just enjoying a beer (no, sorry, this was a muslim China area, so probably we had only lemonade).

Maybe it was not the finest room, and we still had to share the bathroom, but there was fantastic atmosphere there.

Manager of hotel gives the last goodbye to us.


6.Kashgar

The city many talk about but little have seen. For us it is No.1 city experience in China. 

We have got engaged in Kashgar, so I am not very objective about this town in my memories. But as far as I remember, also before the big moment, we were sharing many “Wows!” during the day how much we enjoyed this town.

Adriano had a brilliant idea that Kashgar, an important crossroad of the antient Silk road is a symbolic place for us two, salted travellers of different nationalities to unite and continue one road.

Kashgar is 2000 years old city, one of the most important cities of the Silk road. China is doing a great job to reserve historical centre of the town. It is a renovated city but authentic architecture was reserved, it still feels original and unique, traditional local community lives in the old town. Cosy oldtown and the experience of local natural life happening in narrow old streets amazed me the most. While all oldtowns in Europe become mainly tourist zones, here it felt like in an old movie – simple people doing their daily stuff, restaurants full of local people, children freely running, playing hide and seek across the whole town without any supervision. It felt very lively, cosy, welcoming and beautiful.

Kashgar is very special and famous for who is interested in antient Silk road history, but it is so remote, that still very little tourists come to see it. We have found a handful of foreign tourists in two hostels in the centre and there was not even a single regular hotel in the centre (there were some but outside centre).

There are plenty of local shops in Kashgar. My favourite ones were of vases, local dishes, and scarfs.

Note the sleeping shop owner in the corner on the right

Yygur, local traditional citizens of Kashgar, have developed amazing cuisine. From ancient Silk road to the latest government changes this land has been a crossroad for so many cultures, which still today you can smell and taste on every corner of the town. A scent of grilled meat, freshly baked bread, various Middle East spices tickle your now on every road you take. There is some influence of Chinese, Indian, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan cuisines. I am not the expert, but this is definitely not a pure Chinese cuisine (which I love), but even better - an amazing mix created by very creative community having deep interest in cooking and talent to create unique dishes. If you are interested in food, you have to try Kashgar area cuisine.

In the photo below we are drinking local tea with cakes filled in with meat, while sitting on the carpets at a very low tables.

Two friends, one from Kashgar, other from Lithuania. Age wise we look similar, ahaha

This is a local oven where little cakes with meat or such big “pizzas” are baked.

For someone looking for “exotic” food, here are some raw tripe & testicles which you can buy in the market.

Food in China is one of the greatest experiences in China and deserves a separate post. Please read here .

The last but not least, it felt very calm and safe in Kashgar even for night walks.


8. Bigling Temple

Getting back to the nature, the Bigling Temple was one of the most beautiful day tour during the trip.


9. Xining, China. Tibetan medicine museum.

Last big city in China during our trip. It is interesting for having mixed population of Chinese, muslim Chinese and Tibetans. The most important museum of Tibetan medicine and culture is located in Xining.

Mosque at Xining. A lot of Chinese muslims live here. 

Tibetan calendar.

Tibetans were doing surgeries in VIII century BC. Here is one of many drawings which were used to teach young doctors (the photo below). If you like to play with needles, it can be useful. :)On a serious note, Tibetan museum was very interesting not just for art, ancient calendar, the longest painting in the world, but I mostly liked it because of eye opening exhibitions how old and advanced Tibetan medicine was (maybe still is) thousands of years ago.

In the end of museum, there was a temple. Tradition says to bring some food to leave there, so there was a lot of fruits and various packs on the table. Somebody brought even Fanta and Sprite. :) 

Modern part of the city


10. Karakul lake

Amazing sightseeing outside Kashgar on the way towards Pakistan border.
It is possible to arrange one day tour to the lake from Kashgar, while we were crossing ahead to Pakistan.

This is my top 10. There are other two places which I was not sure to include or not, so here is a bonus – a few places famous and though nice to visit, at the same time too commercial for my taste.

Panda centre in Chengdu

Pandas are lovely though the place to be very honest is very much like a zoo.

(video)

Terracotta warriors in Xi-an

Important monument to see, but very touristic and expensive. It is just this one pavilion of original statues underground, there are other two pavilions but it is just to show that work is happening and there is more coming. Other statues are still underground, the whole area is huge. Emperor who asked for this monument governed the country just for 14 years :) — in Xian, China.






